Table Dialect specification (#41)
frictionlessdata/datapackage: content/docs/specifications/table-dialect.md

## Introduction

Table Dialect defines set of properties that can be used by data producers and data consumers to ensure data interoperability in various tabular data formats such as CSV, JSON, or Excel. The main goal of this specification is to define a common language for defining tabular data dialects. It is not expected that all the properties are supported by all the Data Package implementations. An implementation `MUST` choose the most suitable strategy for communicating to the users if some relevant feature is not supported.

Table Dialect is useful for programmes which might have to deal with multiple dialects of tabular files, but which can rely on being told out-of-band which dialect will be used in a given input stream. This reduces the need for heuristic inference of dialects, and simplifies the implementation of readers, which must juggle dialect inference, schema inference, unseekable input streams, character encoding issues, and the lazy reading of very large input streams.

> Table Dialect is compatible with [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/) specification. The specifications can be used interchangeable in context of the [Data Package (v2)](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/) standard.

Reviewer: Do we still need a CSV dialect if we have a Table Dialect? Is CSV dialect a subset of Table dialect?

Reviewer: Ok, table dialect defines a number of properties, some of which are also used in CSV dialect. And CSV dialect has some properties of its own.

I think this paragraph should be clarified a bit more, since "compatible" and "interchangeable" are open to interpretation.

Reviewer 2: > Interchangable in context of the data package

Isn't clear to me, what is meant here?

Author: So my idea was to say:

- (1) you can use CSV Dialect descriptor inside Table Schema (v2)
- (2) you can use Table Dialect descriptor inside Table Schema (v1)

In both cases, it will work with no problem to the extent of implementation support level. I think (2) can be omitted but (1) seems to be important.

Author: I guess the easiest option will be to say that CSV Dialect is a subset of Table Dialect with full forward compatibility. De-facto, it's a subset as I omitted only no-op properties `caseSensitiveHeader` and `csvddfVersion`

Author: @PietrH 
@peterdesmet 
What wording and solution would you suggest?

Reviewer 3: @roll For an intro/overview, how about something like "Table Dialect describes how tabular data is stored in a file. As a superset of CSV Dialect, it supports delimited text files like CSV as well as data serialization formats (JSON and YAML) and spreadsheets (Microsoft Excel)."

Author: Thanks!

Updated after the @ezwelty's version. Also, simplified to the concept that Table Dialect is a superset of Csv Dialect i.e. any existent CSV Dialect descriptor can be used in Data Package (v2)

A property `MUST` be ignored if it is no applicable for an arbitrary data format. For example, SQL databases do not have a concept of a header row.

For the sake of simplicity, most of examples are written in the CSV data format. For example, this data file without providing any Table Dialect properties:

```csv
id,name
1,apple
2,organe
```

`SHOULD` output this data:

```javascript
{id: 1, name: "apple"}
{id: 2, name: "orange"}
```

### General

General properties are format-agnostic. Usually, there are useful for defining dialects for delimiter-based and spreadsheet-based formats like CSV or Excel.

#### `header`

A Table Dialect descriptor `MAY` have the `header` property that `MUST` be boolean with default value `true`. This property indicates whether the file includes a header row. If `true` the first row in the file `MUST` be interpreted as a header row, not data.

For example, this data file:

```csv
1,apple
2,orange
```

With this dialect definition:

```json
{
  "header": false
}
```

`SHOULD` output this data:

```javascript

> {id: 1, name: "apple"}

Reviewer 4: Where are the key names "id" and "name" coming from in this case?

Author: Thanks! Fixed

#### `delimiter`

A Table Dialect descriptor `MAY` have the `delimiter` property that `MUST` be a string; with default value `,` (comma). This property specifies the character sequence which separates fields in the data file.

For example, this data file:

```csv
id|name
1|apple
2|orange
```

With this dialect definition:

```json
{
  "delimiter": "|"
}
```

`SHOULD` output this data:

```javascript
{id: 1, name: "apple"}
{id: 2, name: "orange"}
```

#### `lineTerminator`

A Table Dialect descriptor `MAY` have the `lineTerminator` property that `MUST` be a string; with default value `\r\n`. This property specifies the character sequence which terminates rows.

For example, this data file:

```csv
id,name;1,apple;2,orange
```

With this dialect definition:

```json
{
  "lineTerminator": ";"
}
```

`SHOULD` output this data:

```javascript
{id: 1, name: "apple"}
{id: 2, name: "orange"}
```

#### `quoteChar`

A Table Dialect descriptor `MAY` have the `quoteChar` property that `MUST` be a string of one character length with default value `"` (double quote). This property specifies a character to use for quoting in case the `delimiter` needs to be used inside a data cell.

> For example, this data file:

Reviewer 3: @roll This looks like `escapeChar`, not `quoteCar` to me. Shouldn't the example be `1,;apple,fruits;`? Also, I think these examples would be more readable if they used the default value, honestly: `1,"apple,fruits"`.

Author: @ezwelty 
Thanks! Fixed

```csv
id,name
1,apple;,fruits
2,orange;,fruits
```

With this dialect definition:

```json
{
  "quoteChar": ";"
}
```

`SHOULD` output this data:

```javascript
{id: 1, name: "apple,fruits"}
{id: 2, name: "orange,fruits"}
```

#### `doubleQuote`

A Table Dialect descriptor `MAY` have the `doubleQuote` property that `MUST` be boolean with default value `true`. This property controls the handling of `quoteChar` inside data cells. If true, two consecutive quotes are interpreted as one.

For example, this data file:

```csv
id,name
1,|apple||fruits|
2,|orange||fruits|
```

With this dialect definition:

```json
{

>   "doubleQuote": true

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't this example require also `quoteChar: |`? Again, I might suggest sticking to default values in these examples: `1,"apple""fruits"`

Author: Thanks! Updated using the default

  </tr>
</table>

> Table Dialect describes how tabular data is stored in a file. As a superset of [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/), it supports delimited text files like CSV, semi-structured formats like JSON and YAML, and spreadsheets like Microsoft Excel. The specification is designed to be expressible as a single JSON-compatible descriptor.

Reviewer: I would deprecate CSV dialect and not mention it here:

```suggestion
Table Dialect describes how tabular data is stored in a file. It supports delimited text files like CSV, semi-structured formats like JSON and YAML, and spreadsheets like Microsoft Excel. The specification is designed to be expressible as a single JSON-compatible descriptor.
```

> Table Dialect describes how tabular data is stored in a file. As a superset of [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/), it supports delimited text files like CSV, as well, as semi-structured formats like JSON/YAML, and spreadsheets like Microsoft Excel. The specification is designed to be expressible as a single JSON-compatible descriptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table Dialect describes how tabular data is stored in a file. As a superset of [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/), it supports delimited text files like CSV, semi-structured formats like JSON and YAML, and spreadsheets like Microsoft Excel. The specification is designed to be expressible as a single JSON-compatible descriptor.
```

## Introduction

Table Dialect defines set of properties that can be used by data producers and data consumers to ensure data interoperability in various tabular data formats such as CSV, JSON, or Excel. The main goal of this specification is to define a common language for defining tabular data dialects. It is not expected that all the properties are supported by all the Data Package implementations. An implementation `MUST` choose the most suitable strategy for communicating to the users if some relevant feature is not supported.

Table Dialect is useful for programmes which might have to deal with multiple dialects of tabular files, but which can rely on being told out-of-band which dialect will be used in a given input stream. This reduces the need for heuristic inference of dialects, and simplifies the implementation of readers, which must juggle dialect inference, schema inference, unseekable input streams, character encoding issues, and the lazy reading of very large input streams.

:::note[Backward Compatibility]

> Table Dialect is a superset of [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/) specification i.e. any CSV Dialect descriptor can be used inside the [Data Package (v2)](https://datapackage.org) descriptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table Dialect supersedes [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/). Except for `csvddfVersion` which is removed, all CSV Dialect properties are included in Table Dialect and can be used without changes.
```

> Table Dialect is a superset of [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/) specification i.e. any CSV Dialect descriptor can be used inside the [Data Package (v2)](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/) descriptor.

Reviewer: Sorry, this is still confusing to me. 😅 

1. CSV dialect is used for Data Resource, not Data Package.
2. The text says v2, but it links to v1.
3. If all properties of CSV dialect are in Table dialect, and both are linked from `Data Resource$dialect`, should we deprecate CSV Dialect then (similar to `tabular-data-package`)?

An attempt:

```suggestion
Table Dialect supersedes the [CSV Dialect](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/csv-dialect/) specification. All CSV Dialect properties are included in Table Dialect.
```

Author: @peterdesmet 
I'm trying to communicate here that if a data publisher wants to switch `datapackage.json` version to `v2` (based on that we handle versioning) than it just works regarding `resource.dialect`. The idea that there are a lot of already existent CSV Dialect descriptors (inline/shared) and they will just work

Would you like to help with wording for it?

Author: @peterdesmet 
So let's have all the CSV Dialect related information in the "Backward Compatibility" note block
